\documentclass[a4paper,man,floatsintext,longtable,noextraspace,12pt]{apa6}

\usepackage[english]{babel}
\usepackage[utf8x]{inputenc}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[colorinlistoftodos]{todonotes}
\usepackage{hyperref}

\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{array}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{pdflscape}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{makecell}
\usepackage{xcolor}
% make captions italic

% number lines
% \usepackage{lineno}
% \linenumbers
            
% bibliography
% definitions for citeproc citations
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproctext{}{}
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproc{mm}{%
  \begingroup\def\citeproctext{#2}\cite{#1}\endgroup}
\makeatletter
 % allow citations to break across lines
 \let\@cite@ofmt\@firstofone
 % avoid brackets around text for \cite:
 \def\@biblabel#1{}
 \def\@cite#1#2{{#1\if@tempswa , #2\fi}}
\makeatother
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-indent, #2 entry-spacing
  {\begin{list}{}{%
   \setlength{\itemindent}{0pt}
   \setlength{\leftmargin}{0pt}
   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}
   % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
   \ifodd #1
    \setlength{\leftmargin}{\cslhangindent}
    \setlength{\itemindent}{-1\cslhangindent}
   \fi
   % set entry spacing
   \setlength{\itemsep}{#2\baselineskip}}}
  {\end{list}}
\usepackage{calc}
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{\hfill\break\parbox[t]{\linewidth}{\strut\ignorespaces#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}

% tightlist
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

\shorttitle{}

\begin{document}
\thispagestyle{otherpage}

%\maketitle

% Change \title, \date, remove \author:
\begin{large}
\textbf{Replication: Hybrid Open Access in Transformative Agreements}
\end{large}

% Add below \maketitle:
\newcommand{\orcid}{%
  \begingroup\normalfont
  \includegraphics[height=6px]{orcid_logo.png}%
  \endgroup
}
Najko Jahn\textsuperscript{1}\textsuperscript{*} (\orcid{} \href{https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5105-1463}{\color{black}{0000-0001-5105-1463}}) \\

\textsuperscript{1} Göttingen State and University Library, University of Göttingen, Germany. \\

\textsuperscript{*} Correspondence: \href{mailto:najko.jahn@sub.uni-goettingen.de}{\color{black}{najko.jahn@sub.uni-goettingen.de}} 

\section*{Abstract}
{}
{\textbf{Keywords}: hybrid open access, transformative agreements, scholarly publishing, big deals, bibliometrics}

\newpage

% QSS wants numbered sections
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{2}

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

This study aims to demonstrate the suitability of open scholarly data
sources for assessing the impact of transformative agreements on hybrid
open access. To achieve this, a replication study was conducted by
comparing results from hoaddata, an openly available and continuously
updated dataset on hybrid open access uptake based on Crossref,
OpenAlex, and the cOAlition S Journal Checker Tool, with the established
bibliometric databases Web of Science and Scopus.

This study focuses on the coverage of hybrid journal portfolios included
in transformative agreements between 2019 and 2023. Special attention is
given to potential differences in open access uptake by country when
comparing first-author affiliation data to corresponding authorships.
This is crucial because the lack of publicly available invoicing data
corresponding to authorships plays an essential role in determining
whether an open-access article is supported through transformative
agreements. Data on corresponding authorships have been available on the
Web of Science and Scopus for much longer than in open databases such as
OpenAlex, where this information is still being roled out at the time of
writing. Because of this weakness, open approaches such as hoaddata and
related research use first-authorship data instead.

By conducting a large-scale comparative analysis, this study aims to

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Determine the strengths and weaknesses of using open data sources in
  monitoring the impact of transformative agreements on hybrid open
  access publishing.
\item
  Assess the coverage and accuracy of open data sources compared with
  established bibliometric databases.
\item
  Evaluate the reliability of first author affiliation data as a proxy
  for corresponding authorship in the context of open access uptake
  analysis.
\end{enumerate}

\section{Background -- Evidence base to measure the effects of
transformative
agreements}\label{background-evidence-base-to-measure-the-effects-of-transformative-agreements}

\subsection{Anforderungen an das
Monitoring}\label{anforderungen-an-das-monitoring}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  esac guidelines
\item
  gemeinsamkeiten und unterschiede zu apc (listenpreise, tatsächliche
  zahlungen, zentrales invoicing, rabatte, waivers)
\item
  insitutionen covern cas, jedoch kann es zu unterschiedlichen
  verrechnugnsformen führen (antielig mit förderer, splitting
  innerhaklbd er einrichtung)
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Bibliometrische Evidenzen}\label{bibliometrische-evidenzen}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  allgmeeiner uptake
\item
  wachstum apcs
\item
  wachstum verträge (konsortien, forschung)
\item
  konsequenzen
\end{itemize}

\section{Data and methods}\label{data-and-methods}

The aim of this study is to demonstrate the suitability of open
scholarly data sources for assessing the impact of transformative
agreements on hybrid open access. To achieve this, results from
hoaddata, an openly available collection of open research information
regarding hybrid open access, was compared with the established
bibliometric databases Web of Science and Scopus. After describing the
initial data sources used, the necessary pre-processing steps to obtain
eligible articles from transformative agreements using open access
evidence, author roles (first and corresponding) and affiliation data
are presented.

\subsection{Data sources}\label{data-sources}

\subsubsection{hoaddata}\label{hoaddata}

hoaddata, developed and maintained by the author to support open access
monitoring and research (Jahn, 2025), is an R data package comprising
information about the uptake of hybrid open access since 2017 from
several openly available data sources. It combines article-level
metadata from Crossref and OpenAlex with transformative agreement
information from the cOAlition S Journal Checker Tool (JCT), which links
journal and institutional data to agreements in the ESAC registry.

More specifically, hoaddata uses Crossref, a DOI registration agency,
for obtaining journal publication volume and open access status through
Creative Commons licence information relative to the published version
(``version of record''). Because of limited affiliation metadata in
Crossref (Eck \& Waltman, 2022), hoaddata sources first-author
affiliations from OpenAlex.

hoaddata follows good practices for computational reproducibility using
R. The package, which includes data, code, a test suite and
documentation, is openly available on GitHub. To ensure computational
reproducibility while aggregating the data, a GitHub Actions continuous
integration and delivery (CI/CD) workflow interfaces with the SUB
Göttingen's open scholarly data warehouse based on Google BigQuery,
which provides high-performant programmatic access to monthly snapshots
of Crossref and OpenAlex. The workflow has run regularly to fetch
updates from these data sources since 2022. The package version used in
this study is 0.3, containing data from the Crossref 2024-08 dump
provided to Crossref Metadata Plus subscribers and the OpenAlex
2024-08-29 monthly dump. This version including the computation log is
available on GitHub
(\url{https://github.com/subugoe/hoaddata/releases/tag/v.0.3}).

\subsubsection{Web of Science}\label{web-of-science}

Clarivate Analytics' Web of Science (WoS) is a well-established
proprietary bibliometric database consisting of several collections
(Birkle et al., 2020). The collections considered in this study were the
Science Citation Index Expanded (SCIE), the Social Sciences Citation
Index (SSCI) and the Arts \& Humanities Citation Index (AHCI),
collectively referred to as Web of Science Primary (WoS Primary).

The WoS Primary provides important data points for analysing open
access: author affiliations and roles, differentiation of journal
articles into document types representing different types of journal
contributions, such as original articles or reviews, and open access
status information derived from OurResearch's Unpaywall, the same
provider as Openalex. However, it lacks information about journals and
articles under transformative agreements.

For programmatic access to article-level data, this study used the
database of the Kompetenznetzwerk Bibliometrie (KB) in Germany. The KB
processes raw XML data provided by Clarivate Analytics, which is
provided as an in-house PostgreSQL database under a uniform schema. To
support reproducibility, KB maintains annual snapshots of the database.
Accordingly, this study used the annual snapshot from April 2024,
wos\_b\_202404, which is considered to cover almost the entire previous
publication year (Schmidt et al., 2024).

\subsubsection{Scopus}\label{scopus}

Elsevier's Scopus, launched in 2004, is another widely used proprietary
bibliometric database for measuring research (Baas et al., 2020).
Similar to the Web of Science, Scopus is selective with regard to the
journals it indexes. However, its coverage is substantially more
extensive than that of the Web of Science collections considered in this
study (Singh et al., 2021; Visser et al., 2021). With detailed metadata
about article types, open access status information derived from
Unpaywall, author roles, and disambiguated affiliations, Scopus also
contains important data to assess open access uptake, although no direct
information regarding transformative agreements was available at the
time of the study.

This study used the Scopus annual snapshot of April 2024 as provided by
the KB (scp\_b\_202404). The same KB curation effort was applied to the
Scopus raw data as for the Web of Science (Schmidt et al., 2024).

\subsection{Data processing steps}\label{data-processing-steps}

\subsubsection{Determining hybrid journal publication
volume}\label{determining-hybrid-journal-publication-volume}

This study examined the adoption of open access for hybrid journals
included in transformative agreements, which published at least one
journal article in the five-year period 2019-2023. The initial data
source was the Transformative Agreements Public Data from the cOAlition
S Journal Checker Tool (JCT), which helps authors identify suitable open
access publishing venues. Weekly snapshots of this data were archived
using an automated GitHub Actions workflow
(\url{https://github.com/njahn82/jct_data}) and into hoaddata. The
resulting JCT data cover agreements active from July 2021 to July 2024.

The JCT journal data was enriched with the linking ISSN (ISSN-L)
according to the ISSN Registry Agency. A comprehensive exclusion of
fully open access journals was performed, following the methodology
described in (\textbf{jahn\_2025?}). This involved checking multiple
journal lists (DOAJ, OpenAlex, Bielefeld) and article-level
investigations. The JCT institution data was enriched with ROR-IDs from
associated institutions, such as university hospitals or institutes of
large research organisations such as the Max Planck Society, according
to OpenAlex' institution entity.

For each database, article metadata was retrieved using all ISSN
variants linked to an ISSN-L. The metadata included DOIs, document types
(where available), author roles, institutional affiliations, publication
dates and open access information. Publication years were determined
using the earliest known date of publication in a journal. In the case
of Crossref, the article data source for hoaddata, this was the issued
date, although variations were observed (check ref). For Web of Science
and Scopus, the earliest publication date was used where available. In
the latter case, the KB determined the earliest known publication date
by tracking versions of the raw data.

\subsubsection{Open Access}\label{open-access}

Only published versions with Creative Commons licenses available on
publisher platforms were considered as hybrid open access. hoaddata
derived this information from Crossref's license metadata, while Web of
Science and Scopus used data from Unpaywall. In additiaon to Crossref,
Unpaywall also parses publisher websites directly, because some
publishers do not provide machine-readable Creative Commons license
information (Piwowar et al., 2018), although transformative agreement
workflows requiring this information during DOI registration (Geschuhn
\& Stone, 2017).

\subsubsection{Author affiliations}\label{author-affiliations}

Author affiliations at the article level were retrieved for both first
and, if available, corresponding authors across all databases. To handle
different address variants, database-specific affiliation identifiers
were used: ROR-IDs from OpenAlex for hoaddata, affiliation enhanced
names for Web of Science, and Scopus Affiliation Identifiers for Scopus.
Additionally, ISO country codes were retrieved for each author's address
to compile country-level statistics. These country codes for Web of
Science and Scopus were provided by the KB.

Because neither Web of Science nor Scopus support ROR IDs---the
institution identifier used by the JCT---a two-step matching process was
implemented to identify articles covered by transformative agreements.
First, 2,782,540 articles from 6,457 institutions with ROR-IDs in the
JCT data since 2017 (according to hoaddata) were processed to map first
authors' ROR-IDs to corresponding proprietary affiliation identifier in
Web of Science and Scopus using DOI matching. Then, an algorithm
selected the most frequent ROR ID and proprietary identifier pairs to
handle multiple affiliations and organizational hierarchy differences.

This process linked 6,375 ROR IDs to 4,894 Scopus Affiliation IDs, and
6,034 ROR IDs to 4,894 enhanced affiliation strings in the Web of
Science. Quality evaluation through random sampling of 50 pairs revealed
an error rate of 22\% for Web of Science (11 mismatches) and 6\% for
Scopus (3 mismatches). Upon inspection, these mismatches primarily
occurred with less-represented institutions having only a few
publications, introduced through multiple affiliations of single
authors. The difference between databases suggests that Scopus's
affiliation control aligns more closely with ROR than that of the Web of
Science.

On the basis of these matching tables, articles eligible under
transformative agreements could also be retrieved from the Web of
Science and Scopus, although they did not contain the ROR IDs used by
the JCT.

\subsubsection{Estimating open access in hybrid journals covered by
transformative
agreements}\label{estimating-open-access-in-hybrid-journals-covered-by-transformative-agreements}

\subsection{Data records}\label{data-records}

As a result of the above-described comprehensive data processing,
data-sets were prepared for each database on open access in hybrid
journals included in transformative agreements at the country and
journal level by year. Table \ref{tab:methods_overview_table} presents
an general overview of the coverage of hybrid journals in transformative
agreements 2019-23 per dataset. It shows that the majority of hybrid
journals published at least one original article or review (core) in the
five-years period. These journals constituted the basis for the
subsequent aggregation of publication metrics. While hoad only covers
articles with DOI, the aggreation of Scopus and Web of Scienc ewas
carried out isng the databse identifier. A subsequent compatision of DOU
coverage illustrates that non.core articles in Web of Scienc e lack
DOIs. These are in aprticular meeting abstracts, a pecularity of this
database. Open access was aggregated using DOI, as all alos Unpaywall
only colelctzs opena cces ststaus information for articles with DOI. A
closer view on core articles with affiliation data reveal a lack of data
withr egard to corresponding auhtors in the case of OpenAlex. Only aroud
two third of investiaged artilces had at affilation data linked to
corresponding authoirs. In case of first authors, the share was higher.
In contrast, web of scienc eand scopus recorded a higher coverage.
Accordingly, only first authro evidence were presented for haoddata in
the follwoing

\begin{table}[H]
\centering
\caption{\label{tab:methods_overview_table}Coverage of hybrid journals in transformative agreements 2019-23.}
\centering
\begin{tabular}[t]{lrrr}
\toprule
\textbf{} & \textbf{HOAD} & \textbf{Web of Science} & \textbf{Scopus}\\
\midrule
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{4}{l}{\textbf{Hybrid journal metrics}}\\
\hspace{1em}Active journals & 12,890 & 8,655 & 11,888\\
\hspace{1em}Active journals (core) & 12,888 & 8,655 & 11,878\\
\hspace{1em}Active journals (core) with OA & 11,348 & 8,392 & 11,313\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{4}{l}{\textbf{Publication metrics}}\\
\hspace{1em}Total published articles & 9,740,015 & 8,616,053 & 8,117,644\\
\hspace{1em}Core articles & 8,158,425 & 6,708,083 & 7,317,703\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{4}{l}{\textbf{Digital Object Identifier (DOI) coverage}}\\
\hspace{1em}Articles with DOI & 9,740,015 & 7,713,796 & 8,105,112\\
\hspace{1em}Core articles with DOI & 8,158,425 & 6,695,661 & 7,314,327\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{4}{l}{\textbf{Open Access (OA) metrics}}\\
\hspace{1em}OA articles & 998,699 & 1,112,758 & 974,099\\
\hspace{1em}Core OA articles & 969,817 & 1,019,784 & 922,578\\
\addlinespace[0.3em]
\multicolumn{4}{l}{\textbf{Core articles with affiliation data}}\\
\hspace{1em}First author articles & 7,242,542 & 6,294,855 & 7,232,017\\
\hspace{1em}Corresponding author articles & 5,534,207 & 6,291,441 & 6,898,487\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{table}

\section{results}\label{results}

\section*{discussion}\label{discussion}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{discussion}

\phantomsection\label{refs}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Baas_2020}
Baas, J., Schotten, M., Plume, A., Côté, G., \& Karimi, R. (2020).
Scopus as a curated, high-quality bibliometric data source for academic
research in quantitative science studies. \emph{Quantitative Science
Studies}, \emph{1}(1), 377--386.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00019}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Birkle_2020}
Birkle, C., Pendlebury, D. A., Schnell, J., \& Adams, J. (2020). Web of
science as a data source for research on scientific and scholarly
activity. \emph{Quantitative Science Studies}, \emph{1}(1), 363--376.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00018}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-van_Eck_2022}
Eck, N. J. van, \& Waltman, L. (2022). \emph{Crossref as a source of
open bibliographic metadata}.
\url{https://doi.org/10.31222/osf.io/smxe5}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Geschuhn_2017}
Geschuhn, K., \& Stone, G. (2017). It's the workflows, stupid! What is
required to make {``offsetting''} work for the open access transition.
\emph{Insights the {UKSG} Journal}, \emph{30}(3), 103--114.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1629/uksg.391}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Jahn_2025}
Jahn, N. (2025). How open are hybrid journals included in transformative
agreements? \emph{Quantitative Science Studies}, 1--39.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00348}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Piwowar_2018}
Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivière, V., Alperin, J. P., Matthias, L.,
Norlander, B., Farley, A., West, J., \& Haustein, S. (2018). The state
of {OA}: A large-scale analysis of the prevalence and impact of open
access articles. \emph{{PeerJ}}, \emph{6}, e4375.
\url{https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.4375}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-schmidt_2024_13935407}
Schmidt, M., Rimmert, C., Stephen, D., Lenke, C., Donner, P., Gärtner,
S., Taubert, N., Bausenwein, T., \& Stahlschmidt, S. (2024). \emph{The
data infrastructure of the {German Kompetenznetzwerk Bibliometrie}: An
enabling intermediary between raw data and analysis}. Zenodo.
\url{https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13935407}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Singh_2021}
Singh, V. K., Singh, P., Karmakar, M., Leta, J., \& Mayr, P. (2021). The
journal coverage of web of science, scopus and dimensions: A comparative
analysis. \emph{Scientometrics}, \emph{126}(6), 5113--5142.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-021-03948-5}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-Visser_2021}
Visser, M., Eck, N. J. van, \& Waltman, L. (2021). Large-scale
comparison of bibliographic data sources: {Scopus, Web of Science,
Dimensions, Crossref, and Microsoft Academic}. \emph{Quantitative
Science Studies}, \emph{2}(1), 20--41.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00112}

\end{CSLReferences}

\end{document}